sync-architecture.md, before:

# Email Sync Architecture

## Overview

The client maintains local email state and syncs with Gmail servers while preserving user actions and showing accurate counters in real-time.

## Core Principles

- **Optimistic UI**: User actions update the UI immediately before server confirmation
- **Eventual Consistency**: Server is source of truth, but client can temporarily diverge during pending operations
- **Action Preservation**: Background syncs never undo recent user actions
- **Accurate Counters**: Display counters = server counters + optimistic adjustments for pending operations

---

## User Action Flow

When a user deletes/archives/snoozes an email:

1. **Immediate UI Update**
   - Thread disappears from inbox
   - Counters decrease immediately
   - Local IndexedDB updated with new labels

2. **Journal Entry Created**
   - Records the action (threadId, action type, timestamp)
   - Used to preserve action during background syncs
   - Enables undo functionality

3. **Operation Queued**
   - API call queued to Gmail
   - Includes retry logic and exponential backoff
   - Processed asynchronously in background

4. **Optimistic Counter Adjustment**
   - `inboxDelta` tracks pending INBOX changes
   - `unreadDelta` tracks pending UNREAD changes
   - Display shows: `serverCount + delta`

5. **Server Confirmation**
   - Gmail API processes the change
   - Operation removed from queue
   - Optimistic deltas eventually reset to 0

---

## Counter Management

### How Counters Work

```
Display Inbox Total = Server Inbox Total + Inbox Delta
Display Unread Total = Server Unread Total + Unread Delta
```

- **Server counters**: Baseline from Gmail (source of truth)
- **Optimistic deltas**: Sum of pending operations' impact
- **Display counters**: What the user sees (always accurate even during pending ops)

### Example

1. Server reports 50 inbox emails
2. User deletes 3 emails → `inboxDelta = -3`
3. Display shows: `50 + (-3) = 47` emails
4. Operations complete, server now reports 47
5. Delta resets to 0, display still shows 47

---

## Background Sync Mechanisms

### 1. History API Sync (Every ~30 seconds)
- Fetches incremental changes from Gmail using `historyId`
- **Protection**: Checks journal for recent user actions (last 5 minutes)
- **Action**: Skips any threads the user recently modified
- **Result**: Fast updates without undoing user actions

### 2. Remote Check (Every 60 seconds)
- Compares Gmail's reported inbox count with local count
- **Protection**: Accounts for optimistic deltas in comparison
- **Action**: If discrepancy > 2 threads, runs gentle hydrate
- **Result**: Catches drift without aggressive syncing

### 3. Authoritative Sync (On startup / manual refresh)
- Enumerates all inbox threads from Gmail
- **Protection**: Checks **BOTH** ops queue **AND** journal before modifications
  - Ops queue: Operations still pending/retrying
  - Journal: Recently completed operations (kept for undo even after sync succeeds)
  - If EITHER indicates a user action, that thread is skipped during reconciliation
- **Before Sync**: Attempts to flush pending operations, but preserves them if they fail
- **Action**: Full reconciliation, adds missing, removes stale (only for threads with no pending/recent actions)
- **Result**: Nuclear option for complete accuracy
- **Important**: 
  - Optimistic counters are only reset if all pending ops successfully complete; otherwise they're recalculated to preserve visual state
  - If unable to check ops/journal due to error, assumes pending changes exist (conservative approach)

---

## Conflict Resolution

When background sync encounters a user action:

**Priority Order:**
1. **Recent user action** (journal entry < 5 min old) → Always preserved
2. **Pending operation** (in ops queue) → Always preserved
3. **Server state** → Applied only if no conflict

**Example Scenario:**
- User archives an email at T+0
- Gmail receives a reply at T+10 seconds
- Background sync runs at T+30 seconds
- **Resolution**: Archive preserved (user action wins), reply appears in Archive folder

---

## Data Storage

### IndexedDB Tables

- **threads**: Thread metadata, labels, message IDs
- **messages**: Full message content and headers
- **ops**: Queued operations to send to Gmail
- **journal**: User action history for undo and conflict resolution
- **settings**: Sync state (historyId), user preferences

### Svelte Stores (Memory)

- **threadsStore**: Current thread list (optimistically updated)
- **messagesStore**: Message details by ID
- **optimisticCounters**: { inboxDelta, unreadDelta }
- **labelsStore**: Label metadata including server counters

---

## Error Handling

### Failed Operations
- Automatic retry with exponential backoff
- After 5 attempts, marked as "stuck"
- User can manually retry or dismiss

### Failed Syncs
- Log error but don't block UI
- Keep optimistic state intact
- Retry on next sync cycle
- Show notification only for critical failures

---

## Performance Safeguards

- **Debouncing**: Minimum 60s between sync checks
- **Visibility**: No syncing when tab hidden
- **Online Check**: No syncing when offline
- **Mutex Flags**: Prevent overlapping sync operations
- **Pagination**: Large syncs use cursors to avoid timeouts

Commit message:

Refine inbox synchronization logic and update sync architecture documentation
Enhanced the inbox synchronization logic to prioritize local counts over potentially stale server counts when recent user activity is detected. Updated the sync architecture documentation to reflect these changes, clarifying the handling of optimistic deltas and server counter refresh strategies. This improvement ensures a more accurate representation of inbox states during user interactions, enhancing overall user experience.

sync-architecture.md, after:

# Email Sync Architecture

## Overview

The client maintains local email state and syncs with Gmail servers while preserving user actions and showing accurate counters in real-time.

## Core Principles

- **Optimistic UI**: User actions update the UI immediately before server confirmation
- **Eventual Consistency**: Server is source of truth, but client can temporarily diverge during pending operations
- **Action Preservation**: Background syncs never undo recent user actions
- **Accurate Counters**: Display counters = server counters + optimistic adjustments for pending operations

---

## User Action Flow

When a user deletes/archives/snoozes an email:

1. **Immediate UI Update**
   - Thread disappears from inbox
   - Counters decrease immediately
   - Local IndexedDB updated with new labels

2. **Journal Entry Created**
   - Records the action (threadId, action type, timestamp)
   - Used to preserve action during background syncs
   - Enables undo functionality

3. **Operation Queued**
   - API call queued to Gmail
   - Includes retry logic and exponential backoff
   - Processed asynchronously in background

4. **Optimistic Counter Adjustment**
   - `inboxDelta` tracks pending INBOX changes
   - `unreadDelta` tracks pending UNREAD changes
   - Display shows: `serverCount + delta`

5. **Server Confirmation**
   - Gmail API processes the change
   - Operation removed from queue
   - Optimistic deltas eventually reset to 0

---

## Counter Management

### How Counters Work

```
Display Inbox Total = Local Thread Count + Optimistic Delta
Display Unread Total = Local Thread Count + Optimistic Delta
```

- **Local thread count**: Number of threads with INBOX/UNREAD labels in IndexedDB
- **Optimistic deltas**: Sum of pending operations' impact
- **Display counters**: What the user sees (always accurate even during pending ops)
- **Server counters**: Periodically fetched from Gmail, but NOT used if there's recent user activity

### Example

1. Local DB has 50 inbox threads
2. User deletes 3 emails → Local DB updated (47 threads), `inboxDelta = -3`
3. Display shows: `47 + (-3) = 47` emails (optimistic, before operation completes)
4. Operations complete → Operations removed from queue, `inboxDelta` resets to 0
5. Display shows: `47 + 0 = 47` emails (now based purely on local DB)

### Server Counter Refresh

Gmail's reported counts are fetched periodically but are **NOT** used to overwrite local counts when:
- There are pending operations in the queue
- There are journal entries from the last 2 minutes (indicating recent user actions)

This prevents showing stale server counts due to eventual consistency delays. Once there's been no activity for 2+ minutes, server counts are used as the authoritative source.

---

## Background Sync Mechanisms

### 1. History API Sync (Every ~30 seconds)
- Fetches incremental changes from Gmail using `historyId`
- **Protection**: Checks journal for recent user actions (last 5 minutes)
- **Action**: Skips any threads the user recently modified
- **Result**: Fast updates without undoing user actions

### 2. Remote Check (Every 60 seconds)
- Compares Gmail's reported inbox count with local count
- **Protection**: Accounts for optimistic deltas in comparison
- **Action**: If discrepancy > 2 threads, runs gentle hydrate
- **Result**: Catches drift without aggressive syncing

### 3. Authoritative Sync (On startup / manual refresh)
- Enumerates all inbox threads from Gmail
- **Protection**: Checks **BOTH** ops queue **AND** journal before modifications
  - Ops queue: Operations still pending/retrying
  - Journal: Recently completed operations (kept for undo even after sync succeeds)
  - If EITHER indicates a user action, that thread is skipped during reconciliation
- **Before Sync**: Attempts to flush pending operations, but preserves them if they fail
- **Action**: Full reconciliation, adds missing, removes stale (only for threads with no pending/recent actions)
- **Result**: Nuclear option for complete accuracy
- **Important**: 
  - Optimistic counters are only reset if all pending ops successfully complete; otherwise they're recalculated to preserve visual state
  - If unable to check ops/journal due to error, assumes pending changes exist (conservative approach)

---

## Conflict Resolution

When background sync encounters a user action:

**Priority Order:**
1. **Recent user action** (journal entry < 5 min old) → Always preserved
2. **Pending operation** (in ops queue) → Always preserved
3. **Server state** → Applied only if no conflict

**Example Scenario:**
- User archives an email at T+0
- Gmail receives a reply at T+10 seconds
- Background sync runs at T+30 seconds
- **Resolution**: Archive preserved (user action wins), reply appears in Archive folder

---

## Data Storage

### IndexedDB Tables

- **threads**: Thread metadata, labels, message IDs
- **messages**: Full message content and headers
- **ops**: Queued operations to send to Gmail
- **journal**: User action history for undo and conflict resolution
- **settings**: Sync state (historyId), user preferences

### Svelte Stores (Memory)

- **threadsStore**: Current thread list (optimistically updated)
- **messagesStore**: Message details by ID
- **optimisticCounters**: { inboxDelta, unreadDelta }
- **labelsStore**: Label metadata including server counters

---

## Error Handling

### Failed Operations
- Automatic retry with exponential backoff
- After 5 attempts, marked as "stuck"
- User can manually retry or dismiss

### Failed Syncs
- Log error but don't block UI
- Keep optimistic state intact
- Retry on next sync cycle
- Show notification only for critical failures

---

## Performance Safeguards

- **Debouncing**: Minimum 60s between sync checks
- **Visibility**: No syncing when tab hidden
- **Online Check**: No syncing when offline
- **Mutex Flags**: Prevent overlapping sync operations
- **Pagination**: Large syncs use cursors to avoid timeouts
